So we're good to go,
we have our project set up and
we can go ahead and
jump right into the basics of Java.
So we're gonna start by
writing our first program,
this is gonna be a very hands on course.
We're gonna write code and
talk about it as we write it so
that we can learn what we're doing, okay?
So the first program that we're gonna
write is a gross pay calculator.
So it says, write a program that
calculates an employee's gross pay.
All right, so back to our IDE.
Now, if you look in the left
panel under Project,
this is where all of our files
are going to live that we create, okay?
So you should have a little thing under
here that says source, a little folder.
Under Source there's a main and a test.
So we're gonna write all
of our code in the main.
And then there's a folder under
main that says Java, all right?
So, the very first thing we
wanna do is to create a package.
So a package in Java is simply a folder
that contains a bunch of Java files.
It doesn't have to be a bunch,
it could be one, zero, whatever.
But it contains Java files, and
it's some sort of logical containment.
So for example, this program that we're
gonna write is a basic Java program,
so we're gonna create a package that's for
basics, okay?
So, under Java, you're gonna right click
and you're going to hover over new.
And then you want to say package,
new package.
Now, the convention, we're gonna talk
about conventions all throughout.
The convention, what it means,
convention means this is what's
widely accepted by Java developers all
over the world as this is what we do.
It's not a rule.
Nothing will break if you don't do this,
but people will look at you funny,
all right?
So your package, the name of that
starts with a lowercase letter,
if it needs to contain multiple
words in it people will
typically do underline or
something like that.
So for ours, we're gonna call it basics,
all lowercase.
All right, so there's our package,
our folder, inside of the package
is where we'll create a new class,
so a class is basically a Java file.
This is what you write your Java code in.
So on basic we're gonna do new and
then Java class.
And then we need to give it a name.
Convention says that your class name
should begin with a capital letter, okay?
So we're gonna call ours
GrossPayCalculator, and
notice this is kind of like three words,
you cannot have spaces in your class
names so they all need to be one word,
but we use camel case to distinguish
between the words, okay?
So notice pay has a capital P.
Calculator has a capital C.
Press Enter.
Okay.
And now we have our new class.
Okay, so
notice here we have our package defined on
the first line that is required.
And then we have the class declaration.
So it starts with public, class,
and then the name of the class.
The name of the class has to be
the same name as the file, okay?
And Java is case sensitive.
So if you happen to have named this with
a lowercase g, I would get an error.
I don't know what you're talking about,
right?
So it has to match this exactly,
and it's case sensitive.
All right, so
the class after the class name,
we have a set of curly braces,
this encompasses the class.
So anything written between these curly
braces belongs to this class, all right?
So our assignment was
to write a program that
calculates an employee's gross pay, right?
So we want to one, get some input from
whoever is going to use this program,
asking them about their
number of hours worked,
as well as their pay rate.
So within the class you need methods.
And then you can write
code within the methods.
And we'll have a whole section on methods.
But for now, trust me,
we're gonna write a main method.
And the main method is where all
Java applications start from.
So it's gonna look for
a main method when the program runs, and
it's gonna start executing that.
So to write the main method,
it has to be exactly
like this public_static void main, and
inside of parentheses,
you're gonna write String,
a set of square brackets, and then args.
Then within the main method,
we can write our code.
So, again, we're gonna do output,
we're gonna say System.out.println.
And then we're going to
print a string text.
This is within quotation marks, okay?
So we can ask them,
how many hours did you work?
And then we're gonna want
to read this back in.
So we can use what's called a scanner.
So it's a class in Java.
Java provides it automatically.
So when we write Scanner,
notice there's an error right here,
and there's also a suggestion.
So I can click on this.
And I basically did the shortcut that
IntelliJ told me which was option and
return, and
it imported the scanner for me.
So if you wanna use a class that
is outside of this one, you wanna
use any of its methods or anything like,
that you need to import that in.
So we'll say scanner,
we'll call it scanner = new Scanner.
And we wanna read from
the input the console.
So we'll say System.in.
All right?
Now with this scanner object,
we can now use the dot operator
to show us a bunch of methods that
are available from this class.
So what we want is to read from the input.
And so, we can do what's called next.
And next will read whatever was the last
thing that was on the console, okay?
So, this will read this in.
Now, notice here, we're asking for hours.
So, this might be a whole number,
an integer.
So we want to read specifically,
there's a bunch of methods here.
Next it's gonna read a string and
we can read nextInt to say,
I'm expecting an integer to
come back here, all right?
Question.
>> So the scanner is to
read from the command line?
>> Yes.
All right, now,
we're reading this from the command line,
however, we need to store it in a variable
if we want to use it later on, okay?
So a variable is essentially a memory
location that can hold data.
Java is a statically typed language
different than JavaScript.
Meaning that the compiler
needs to know what the data
type is before you can
execute the program, okay?
So when we declare our variables,
we have to preface it with the data type.
So we want to say int,
which is the data type for an integer,
we're gonna give the variable a name,
we'll call it hours,
and then we'll put an equal sign, okay?
So, on the left side of this equal sign,
is the declaration of the variable,
on the right is the value that'll
be stored in that variable.
Good?
All right.
So, we have, how many hours they work.
We also need their pay rate.
So, let's ask them another question.
To do so,
we're gonna do another System.out.println.
Now, if you're using IntelliJ,
there's a lot of nice shortcuts.
Java is a very verbose language,
meaning you have to type a lot, right?
In IntelliJ, you'll see me do this.
I'll just say the whole thing, but
I'm gonna do sout, which is a shortcut.
If I press Tab, it'll go ahead and
auto-complete that for me.
So you'll see me do that a lot, but
I won't say it anymore, all right?
So how many hours did you work?
And now we need to know what
is your hourly pay rate?
Okay, we wanna read this Int again, right?
So we've already declared
scanner on line 10.
We don't have to do that again,
we can just use it again.
And this time we're asking for
a pay rate, it could be a decimal number.
So instead of int,
we're gonna use double as the type, and
then we want to name this variable,
we'll name it rate.
Variables, convention,
start with a lowercase letter.
And then we'll say scanner.nextDouble,
right?
We're reading a double.
Now that we're done with the input we
can go ahead and close that scanner, so
we'll just say scanner.close.
Notice, every statement in
Java ends with a semicolon.
This is not optional,
must end with a semicolon.
So now that we have our input,
we can do our calculation.
So in order to determine the close pay,
we can say hours times rate.
What will be the data type for that?
You're multiplying
an integer times a double.
>> Double.
>> Double, good.
So we're gonna say double,
let's call this payRate.
Notice, two words.
Again, variables cannot have space either.
If you're doing a multi where you use
the cam case, start it with lower case.
Double payRate = hours * rate, great,
and now we can print this out to the user.
So we'll say Gross Pay I'm
gonna put a little space there.
Now I want to append the value
from the variable to this stream.
I can do that with a plus sign, okay?
I just write the pay rate right here,
okay?
Good to go.
Should we run it?
All right, let's go ahead and run this
Lovely, so, we see on the console is
asking how many hours did you work?
I'm gonna say 40 hours.
And pay rate, let's say
maybe 15, 50, okay?
So the gross pay would then be 620.
Lovely, all right, so
that was our first program.
We learned a lot of the very
basics of Java, such as packages,
classes, main method, input and output.
Any questions?
Yeah.
>> What happens if you
don't close the scanner?
>> Great question.
Okay, what happens if you
don't close the scanner?
So this is a good question, I'm gonna use
this opportunity to teach two things.
So, I'm gonna comment this out.
A comment is essentially,
you can put two slashes and
it's telling the computer don't listen
to this, ignore that line, right?
Don't try to execute that.
All right, so if you don't close
the scanner, essentially that
resource is left open once
the program like eventually closes,
and ends, and
terminates it may release that, but
if not it'll just kind of be
running in the background.
If this was a really lengthy program,
you had a lot of other resources going on,
you could see how that might
start interfering with things.
So it's not the end of the world
if you forget to close it.
Unless you're on some big, huge
enterprise application you got a bunch of
these things going, and
it could cause some performance issues.